[THEME MUSIC]
>>LISA GARR: Hi, I'm Lisa Garr,
host of "Gaia Inspirations."
And our topic here, at
the Celebrate Your Life
Conference in
Phoenix, Arizona, is
to explore the "I am" meaning.
I was introduced to
the "I Am Discourses"
through Dr. Wayne Dyer.
And, also, the word "I
am" shows up many times
in "A Course in Miracles."
And my guest today is spiritual
teacher, Marianne Williamson.
She's also a political
activist, an incredible mentor
in my life.
And in the course,
which she teaches also,
there's a beautiful phrase.
And it says, "I am the
light of the world."
and we're going to talk
a little bit about that
and the meaning of
I am with Marianne.
Welcome.
So thank you so
much for being here.
>>MARIANNE WILLIAMSON: Well,
thank you for having me.
>>LISA: You have been
a teacher of the course
for many, many, many years.
>>WILLIAMSON: And a student.
A teacher is a student,
and a student is a teacher.
>>LISA: Yes.
You wrote about it in "A
Return to Love", and you--
>>WILLIAMSON: All
the books really.
>>LISA: It's a theme
throughout many of your books.
What does that phrase
mean to you, I am?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, of
course, we all know the Bible.
When Moses says, who
do I say that you are?
I am that I am.
From a metaphysical
perspective, the idea
here is that the world tells
you that you are who, in fact,
you are not.
And the world-- the
thinking of the world
tells you that you are
not who, in fact, you are.
The world tells us
that we are bodies,
that we are limited to our
own mortal circumstances.
The world tells
me I am over here.
You are over there.
Now, that alone-- Einstein
said time and space
are illusions of consciousness.
So the three
dimensional plane, which
is what our physical
senses attach
themselves to and then use as
evidence of ultimate reality,
is itself an illusion.
And it is a delusion in
that it reflects back to us
a reality that is not
the ultimate truth.
So it tells us that we're
separate from the rest
of the world.
I am separate from
the rest of life.
So when you say, I am love.
I am spirit.
I am the light of the world.
You are shifting
your self-perception
from body identification
to spirit identification.
And "A Course in
Miracles" says that is
the journey of enlightenment.
So when you realize I am body.
That's very different
than I am spirit.
I am my failures.
I am my mistakes.
I am other people's--
>>LISA: Sick, or whatever it is.
Yeah.
>>WILLIAMSON: --opinions of me.
I am my resume.
I am my past.
That is a very dense, weary,
and wearying perception of self.
But when you say I am whatever
I choose to be in this instance,
the past being over-- I am,
through the power of choice,
capable of forgiving the past,
forgiving myself, forgiving
others, atoning for
my mistakes, standing
in the light of
the present moment.
Then, I am being who
I truly am, which
is an infinite field of
possibility for a future
unlike the past.
So who do you think
you are and also
what you think your purpose
is in a situation, which
is ultimately, very much tied to
who you think you are, makes it
completely-- it is like
two different universes.
You're choosing.
And we are choosing
every moment,
either consciously
or unconsciously.
Do I wish to exist in a
personal universe of chaos
and suffering?
Or do I choose to live in a
personal universe of peace
and harmony?
And that decision is
based on who I think I am
and who I think
others are to me.
>>LISA: So that I am can
really literally set you
in a totally
different direction.
That can set you in a
completely different direction
from going towards the sickness
and the disidentification
into identifying and moving--
literally moving forward
into a different direction.
>>WILLIAMSON: It's
not just that it can.
It's that it does.
Every moment, the question
who am I, and why am I here?
If I think that I'm
here to-- I am here
to get something from you,
takes me into one situation.
I am here to be a
blessing on everyone
in the room takes you
into another situation.
So it's not just that it can.
It's that it does.
Every thought and every
moment, like I said,
you are making that
choice, who you
think you are in every moment.
It's just sometimes
it's conscious,
and, sometimes,
it's unconscious.
>>LISA: There's a verse
that I took from the course
and it also appears in
your "Return to Love,"
and it says, "Holy
am I who have been
given the function of
lighting up the world.
Let me be still
before my holiness.
And here's the best part.
And it is calm.
And in that light, all of
my conflicts disappear."
That is so beautiful.
That is so rich.
That is so true.
>>WILLIAMSON: And,
of course, that
mentions in that
beautiful section,
also, that that
is your function.
When you are in-- you're aligned
with your true state of being,
you cannot but, be a positive
and loving influence,
even a miraculous influence
on those around you
because there's only one mind.
So when I am at one and aligned
with the truth of my being,
your-- the truth of
your being is activated.
>>LISA: It's happening
right now, absolutely.
Yes, as I'm sitting
here with you,
I am matching the
vibration that you're at.
And it is elevating where
I was to where I'm going.
>>WILLIAMSON: "A
Course in Miracles"
says people hear you on the
level that you speak from.
That's why when you realize
that you are blessed,
you are a blessing.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
I saw you speak at the
Parliament of World Religions.
Oh, girl!
You lit up that stage.
>>WILLIAMSON: A little
rambunctious that day.
>>LISA: Well, you were here
with these incredible religious
leaders.
And you were here in a state
of talking about world religion
as--
>>WILLIAMSON: And women.
That was a women's plenary.
>>LISA: It was a
women's plenary.
I want to have you take a
look at this video real quick,
and then we'll talk about this.
Take a look.
>>WILLIAMSON: What an
extraordinary opportunity
to have a world
parliament of religions,
to have people
representing religions
from all over the world
throughout our great tapestry
of history here in order to
not only support each other,
but to support the
common mission,
that common mission being to
live the lives that we are all
called to, at the core of the
universality of the themes
that we all share.
But I think, also, we
have the opportunity,
being here together, to
do the work of religion
within ourselves.
And one of the great
religious principles
is to purify your own heart and
atone for your own mistakes.
So as lovely as it is that at
this year's Parliament of World
Religions, women's
voices are given
the power and the
privilege that we
have at this great gathering,
as women let us just point out,
not with anger or with rancor
that the history of religion
has not been so good to women.
And to be honest, in many of
the great institutionalized
religions that are represented
even here at this parliament,
they're not doing
so good even today.
So let's take a moment to atone
in our hearts, to be honest,
and be real because religion,
when it refuses to be honest
and refuses to be real,
allows itself merely
to be co-opted by the
very forces we are here
to protect human beings from.
And that is why many of the
female voices rising today
in religious fervor, forming
a new vortex of priestesshood,
are finding ourselves,
at some times,
working within
religious institutions,
at other times, not welcomed
in our true femaleness
and practicing our
priestesshood elsewhere.
Every woman here who is
a healer is a priestess.
a teacher or an educator
is a priestess.
Every woman here who
feels in her heart
that she was sent by divine
mission, the same small voice
for God that not only leads
the great religious figures
to perform their divine mission,
but which Mahatma Gandhi said
was the leader of the Indian
Independence Movement.
No matter whether it's
political or religious
or educational or business or
science or politics, whatever,
we are here.
And this is the true
religious calling,
to answer to that
small still voice
within and lay it
down wherever we are.
And so the last thing that
would serve a world parliament
of religions and
the last thing that
would serve the women of
the world is for any of us
to be too self
congratulatory at this time.
Every woman needs to understand
that having a meaningful life
is not a popularity contest.
Every religion, every
religious leader, every woman
needs to understand if what
you're saying is always
getting applause,
you're probably
not yet doing the right stuff.
Because if we are to truly
stand for the reclamation
of the heart of
humanity, we must
remember that we live today
on a planet that is not
organized according
to principles that
reclaim the heart of humanity.
World civilization today is
predicated on principles that
break the heart of humanity.
World civilization
today is predicated
on principles that
foster separation
and not unity, that foster
greed over humanitarianism,
and that foster
devolution and destruction
and decay of the Earth and
the living things upon it
more than the rebirth of the
possibilities divinely inspired
in all of us by which we might
become a human race at peace
with each other, with our
God, and with our planet.
So when we talk about
nonviolent resistance,
don't just concentrate
on the nonviolent part,
also concentrate on
the resistance parts.
Let us remember the women on
the planet today who are raped,
who are tortured, whose
children are killed,
whose husbands are killed,
whose brothers are killed,
who they themselves are
killed and, sometimes,
yes, in the name of religion.
Let us not forget that.
And let us not forget that
to speak in real solidarity
with such women-- I ask
myself, for instance,
as an American woman, what if
every American woman had laid
down on the highways
across America and said,
no, you will not invade Iraq?
No, you will not do that
to the women of Iraq.
No, you will not do
that to their children.
No, you will not
bomb their homes?
I also know that to have
called for that at the time
would have gotten
no real reaction.
But we, you, I, this is our job.
Let us create our societies
in whatever area we are.
If you're an educator,
if you're a healer,
if you're a religious leader,
if you are-- whatever you do,
let us prepare the ground,
fertilize the soil,
prepare the listening so that
as women do find their voices
and men find their
voices, we must remember
that passionate, free thinking
women have never been deeply
appreciated by the great
religions of the world
because passionate,
free thinking women
raise passionate, free
thinking children.
And passionate, free
thinking children
grow up to be passionate,
free thinking adults.
And passionate,
free thinking adults
are very difficult to
manipulate and almost
impossible to control.
>>LISA: I read the
comments after that.
How many millions of
views have there been?
>>WILLIAMSON: A couple million.
>>LISA: A couple million.
>>WILLIAMSON: More
than 2 million.
>>LISA: Because
you got up there,
and you stood in your right.
And it was about being-- about
world religion not working.
>>WILLIAMSON: Like, hello!
>>LISA: You're the Conference
of World Religions,
and this is not working.
Tell me about that.
Where did that come
from inside of you?
Did you plan that?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, I--
for 30 years, I planned it.
I am aware that people,
such as yourself and myself,
so many of our colleagues, so
many people around the world,
in both secular and
religious constant-- context
are doing what we can to
bring down the light of love
and possibility.
And as I say in that
talk, that is a kind
of new priestesshood to me.
Every woman who is an
activist is a priestess.
author is a priestess.
Every woman who is
doing the kind of work
that you're doing in the
media is a priestess.
Every woman who is a
mother is a priestess.
A wife is a priestess.
What does that mean?
That means you're
holding the space
and invoking the possibility
in much the way you and I were
talking about.
Now, organized religion has
this grandiosity around itself,
and it acts as though
it's doing that.
But I question it.
In fact, I challenge
the belief that it's
doing that anymore or
any less than any of us
are who are seeking
to live according
to that small,
still voice within.
I'm intrigued by the Quakers.
I'm intrigued by
that notion that they
have of the inner light--
that universal inner light
within every man,
woman, or child that
creates a profound equality,
that the spirit of God
is in all of us know more
and no less than anyone else.
And to the extent to
which any one of us
listens to that
small, still voice
and lives from that small,
still voice, to that extent,
we are all providing a
ministerial function.
We are all providing
a priestly function.
>>LISA: Talk about
that, the priestess.
I've seen you talking
about that lately.
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, when
I-- in that video that you
were showing, it
was specifically
in the context of talking
to religious leaders.
So they we're making a
big hoopla over the fact
that at this year's
Parliament of World Religions
women had such a voice.
And women were--
well, let's be real,
the reason women have such
a voice is because women,
as usual, we're
doing all the work.
So I mean, come on!
>>LISA: And haven't had a voice.
>>WILLIAMSON: Yeah, thank you.
So I just thought I would
mention that it's fine
that you're doing this in
Salt Lake City in 2015,
but the last few thousand
years have not really
gone that well for us.
>>LISA: Yes, you
were very clear.
>>WILLIAMSON: Just
a little mention.
>>LISA: The elephant
in the room.
>>WILLIAMSON: But I think that
the important part for me,
in all seriousness,
was we have gone on.
And that's-- I remember when
I first started my career.
And my mother would call
me and say, your father
and I have discussed it.
And if you want to go
to rabbinical school,
we'll send you to
rabbinical school.
In other words, you
can't just get up
and start talking about God.
And, at that time,
those-- it did
seem as though there
were two choices.
You could be an academic,
like a professor
of comparative religion
or something, or clergy.
And neither felt correct to me.
I just wanted to talk about God.
I wanted to talk about
the course in miracles.
There was no
institutional surrounding.
And what I've
experienced is that when
you're content is-- all you want
to do is be ablaze with God,
then form emerges organically.
So the thinking of the
world says, no, you
have to look through
the world of form
and see where you might fit in.
I spoke at Harvard Divinity
School a couple of weeks
ago as well.
And it was interesting to me how
many of the students at Harvard
Divinity School-- they're
in Divinity School,
but they don't
necessarily see themselves
having congregations.
And some of them are dealing
with, where do I go with this?
From a metaphysical perspective,
you align with your being
first, and the doing
will take care of itself
because you will be
intuitively guided
and also the forms will appear.
So my message with the
Parliament of World Religions
is that institutional
religions are just one context
for the genuine religious life.
And they are only one context
for genuine religious fervor.
And they are only one
context for genuine religious
bringing it down.
You could call it priestly
function, priestess.
The course in miracles says, "I
am among the ministers of God--
is one of the lessons
in the course--
that we are all ministers.
You are ministering
through this program.
You're ministering through
that great book that you write.
You are ministering as a wife.
You're ministry as a mother.
We are all here.
That is a function
all of us have,
no matter what our job is.
If we see its purpose
as to use our talents
and use our resources
to minister unto life,
to bring greater life, to
bring greater blessing,
to bring greater healing,
then you are doing that work.
And no institution gets to
claim that work for its own,
particularly given
its track record
over the last few
thousand years.
>>LISA: Well, you have-- we have
a clip of that Harvard Divinity
School.
We have you speaking to that
congregation, essentially
is what it was.
>>WILLIAMSON: We are displaying,
as a species, behavior--
collective behavioral
patterns that
are maladaptive for the survival
of our species, quite simply.
We are the only species known
to systematically destroy
its own habitat.
And we simplify fight too much.
There are-- one gentleman
argued earlier today
that-- he said the wolverines.
But maybe he's right
about the wolverines.
But other than that we
are the only species that
exhibits gratuitous cruelty.
And we fight each
other too much,
and we are fighting
each other now
with weapons, responsible use
of which, if you could even
say that there's such a thing
as responsible use of which,
is so far from our
actual practices
that the stress point on
the planet-- I remember,
years ago, I went to--
I think it's Wyoming.
Forgive me.
I get dyslexic about
Wyoming and Idaho.
One of them had huge
fires in the 1980s.
And this horrible conflagration
that occurred in that state
at that time actually
changed the calculus
of professional firefighting.
Because what-- before
that time, there
is a concept in
professional firefighting
called the acceptable burn.
I live in California, so
we know, unfortunately,
a lot about fire, so
right now, once again
exacerbated by the draught,
once again exacerbated
by climate change, and so forth.
Acceptable burn means
where they do a calculus,
and they say, OK, our best
way to deal with this one
is to let it burn.
What happened that
particular summer,
in either Idaho or Wyoming--
I'm going to get things
on Facebook and Twitter.
It was Idaho.
It was Wyoming,
whatever-- in one of them.
I think it was Wyoming--
was that there were
too many otherwise considered
acceptable burns too
close together happening
at the same time.
And that's what made
the whole thing blow up.
That is what is happening
on the planet today.
You could talk about
climate change.
You could talk about terrorism.
You could talk about
economic injustice.
You could talk
about so many things
that we're going
through in this country.
And you could talk about
so many things are going on
in the planet, and say,
we can handle this.
The body-- neither the body
nor civilization nor the psyche
evolved over thousands and, in
some cases, millions of years
without developing a
system within itself that
enabled it to take a hit.
And American democracy has
taken some hits, but there
comes a time, if the
body takes too many hits,
then-- I remember hearing
President Clinton talking
about assault weapons.
And hearing him talk about
emergency room doctors saying
to him, if somebody comes in,
and there's a gunshot wound,
in a lot of cases, we have
a good chance of saving him.
It's when it has been
an assault weapon
and there are ten gunshot wounds
where we don't have a chance.
Are you with me?
So what's happening
on the planet today
is a whole systems breakdown
that we've got on our hands.
And it takes a whole
system's response.
If you look at
someone like-- if you
look at a phenomenon
like the Nazis,
look at the Japanese
Imperial army,
World War II
represented a cancer,
but it was an operable cancer.
It was a cancer which could
be surgically removed.
And it was brilliantly,
surgically removed.
Today, we have a cancer, which
has metastasized broadly,
is wrapped around many healthy--
otherwise healthy organs,
invasive measures even
when they have been tried.
We can argue whether
the invasion of Iraq
could have or should have
ever been seen as that.
But even to whatever
extent it was,
giving George Bush
and Dick Cheney
a way benefit of the
doubt, clearly did a little
more than spread the cancer.
So we now need a
holistic perspective.
>>LISA: It's so
interesting that you
say about the difference
between the congregation
and the people speaking
about world religions
and where they're
going to go with this.
And there's such
a difference now
were you don't necessarily
need to be a scholar, even
though it's wonderful to learn
about the ancient religions
in the text and world religions.
But you can come out and talk
as a person of authority,
as you have, about God,
about world religions,
about the Bible, and
not necessarily have
to be a scholar of the
organized religion.
That gives-- that
right right there,
what you're talking about,
is you bringing your light.
You shinning your light
brighter than it ever had to be,
just shining that
light so bright.
And you speaking there,
you're an example
of that to many people.
I said in the
beginning, I am light.
That is what you're doing is
you're being a light for God,
for religion.
>>WILLIAMSON: There's an
interesting issue there,
however.
I think that a lot
of the criticism that
is waged against much of
our consciousness movement
does have legitimacy
in that there are--
there do seem to be
people these days
who attend a seminar or
two and set themselves up
as spiritual teachers.
That's not cool.
And the criticism wage
that, oh, you guys are just
coming up with ideas of your own
and standing up and saying this
is God's truth.
That is not what
I'm talking about.
I'm a student of a
course in miracles,
and I'm someone who
is read for years
and practiced it for years.
So when someone gives a, quote
unquote, "spiritual moniker"
to their work, they
should have some basis
in a serious spiritual
text of some kind.
I do believe that.
But if you want to call
it a motivational speaker,
strictly motivational speaker
or life coach or something,
then, yes, there's a
ministerial function
that has to do with
people believing
in themselves,
with people knowing
that there's a higher power.
You look at something like AA.
They talk about a higher power,
God as you understand him.
So I think that
once you recognize
that the world is in such
trouble and that all of us
must see ourselves now
and can see ourselves
and can act as
immune cells-- we're
all here to be part
of the immune cells,
the healing of the body.
Then, the point is not
the word, but the energy
that we bring to the
experience by which we
surrender ourselves every day.
The course in miracles says that
you can wake up every morning
and say the prayer,
where would you
have me go, what would you
have me do, what would you
have me say, and to whom?
And then you surrender, and
you say, dear God, use me.
I think it's very helpful
to remind ourselves--
and I say to people
all the time.
You're not the water.
You're the faucet.
It's not like you're going
to go heal the world,
but you can
surrender yourself so
that a power greater than
you uses you as a conduit,
uses your hands, uses your
feet, puts ideas in your mind,
puts inspiration, puts
love in your heart.
That's number one.
And secondly, I always
feel, in my own life,
that 90%-- any problem
I have, 90% of the time,
I find a solution more easily
if I remember this one thing.
Marianne, get over yourself.
It's not about you.
And that goes back to I am.
I am not this separate
self who's just about me,
me, me, me, me.
>>LISA: Mhm.
I was reading a quote this
morning by Viktor Frankl.
>>WILLIAMSON: Uh huh.
Wow, he's--
>>LISA: And it really,
really was profound.
And it was along those lines.
And he said you can take
anything away from a man.
But you cannot take
away his attitude.
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, of course,
he was speaking as a Holocaust
survivor who had been through--
>>LISA: Suffering.
>>WILLIAMSON: The most heinous--
>>LISA: Tremendous, tremendous,
tremendous suffering.
And what he had, the one
freedom that he said he had left
was his attitude--
>>WILLIAMSON: What
he chose to think.
>>LISA: --and his ability
to control his attitude.
>>WILLIAMSON: No
one can make you.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
And that was so important to me
because you could take anything
away except our ability
to control our attitude.
>>WILLIAMSON: You know I was
reading about Viktor Frankl
once.
And I can't remember-- when
the Holocaust was over,
I can't remember if he
took one year or two years
and remained in
complete silence,
said he was going to
remain in complete silence
and then would spend the
rest of his life speaking
for the victims
of the Holocaust.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>WILLIAMSON: I thought
that was so profound.
>>LISA: That would
makes sense because of--
>>WILLIAMSON: I can't remember.
>>LISA: --he had
to digest it all.
>>WILLIAMSON: Unspeakable.
>>LISA: When you were
talking to me earlier
about your next book that's
coming out about suffering
and depression, can
we talk about what
your suggestions are?
>>WILLIAMSON: Oh, Lisa.
This is such a huge issue
and such a huge issue
in our society at this moment.
The role of religion-- going
back to the role of religion,
religion used to play
the role of comforter.
It comforted people through
the experiences of life
by giving it meaning.
It inspired people, and
it comforted people.
Well, it has abdicated the role.
And it abdicated the
role to psychotherapy.
And psychotherapy was not
a traditional-- western
psychotherapy was
not able to provide
an ultimate context of meaning
because, except in the cases
of those such as Carl Jung, it
doesn't dwell within a world
view of ultimate meaning.
So over the last few years,
it has abdicated the role
to psychopharmacology.
And what we have now is
a crisis in our country.
People are taking
anti-depressants like candy.
It's one thing when you talk
about the very, I think,
valid-- I believe, very
legitimate conversation
around psychotherapeutic
drugs for a bipolar diagnosis,
a diagnosis of
schizophrenia, and so forth.
However, these psychotherapeutic
and psychopharmacological
industries now-- because
we are talking about--
>>LISA: Very huge.
>>WILLIAMSON:
--billions of dollars
being made off this-- have
now absconded with the word
depression.
So if I say I'm sad.
You say you're sorry.
If I say, I'm really
depressed, there
is this like
automatic assumption,
well, perhaps you
need medication.
And no one is questioning this.
They so, oh, well
clinical diagnosis.
Clinical diagnose-- we have
this witch doctor thing.
Clinical diagnosis.
And so the truth of the matter
is, in many ways, obscured.
The truth of the
matter, for instance,
people who are 25 and younger,
for people who are 25 years old
and younger, anti-depressants
actually increase suicide risk.
And we're throwing
anti-depressants
at all young people.
We are not-- we
don't have any kind
of truly sophisticated--
and certainly
not from a spiritual
perspective-- view
of what sadness is.
And that it's part of life.
We have this cheap yellow
smiley face that we just
pour on everything these days.
Happy, happy, happy.
Just like the body
has an immune system.
Grief is part of our
psychic immune system.
If you go through
a car accident,
and you're very
bruised and beaten up--
>>LISA: Trauma.
>>WILLIAMSON: --it's
understood your body is going
to need some time to heal.
Well, if you go through
a psychological trauma
or emotional trauma, we need to
understand it's understandable.
You're going to need
some time to heal.
That's not a mental illness.
Sadness is not a mental illness.
Grief is not a mental illness.
>>LISA: It's become a meme
that permeates our society as--
>>WILLIAMSON: And it's
very terrible now.
You have just this epidemic
of the people taking
antidepressants
like they're candy,
as though it's no big deal.
And what kills me,
in our community,
is all these people
who say, oh, I
don't want chemicals in my food.
I don't want
chemicals in my food.
But for-- because I don't
want chemicals in my body.
Why do you not want
chemicals in your body,
but you are so open to
chemicals in your brain?
>>LISA: Well, that's part
of the meme of society.
We have the advertisements.
>>WILLIAMSON: It's
part of the meme.
>>LISA: It is.
>>WILLIAMSON: And Abilify, which
is the single largest selling
prescription drug
in America today
is an anti-psychotic drug.
It's an anti-psychotic drug.
And, Lisa, this is not the
time in America to be numb.
>>LISA: Well, it goes back--
let me go back to the religion
conversation here
because, do you think,
and especially that generation
you're talking about,
is missing meaning, community,
society because of the fact
there isn't-- what organized
religion did provide,
provided that.
It provided gatherings--
group gatherings.
It was a commonality.
It was a greater purpose.
That there's a higher
divinity above--
not above you, but in play here,
that there's something larger
than life.
>>WILLIAMSON: Above the main
thought forms that dominate.
>>LISA: Rights
>>WILLIAMSON: It's within you,
but it's higher thought forms.
>>LISA: So is our
youth missing that?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well, the--
if you actually look-- let's
say Buddhism and Judaism
and Christianity,
suffering is central
to all of them.
In Buddhism, had Buddhism
not left his father's house
and seen age and suffering and
disease for the first time,
he would not have begun
his path to enlightenment.
His ultimate realization
was that life is suffering.
His ultimate realization was
that attachment to the things
of the world is suffering.
And the only escape from
this is through enlightenment
or being lifted and rising
above these attachments.
In Judaism, in
the Old Testament,
the suffering of the
Israelites, when they were
slaves in Egypt, the
suffering of the Israelites
in their journey through
the desert on their way
to the promised land.
And, of course, the
suffering of Jesus on the
cross in Christianity.
So it's not like, quote,
"religions" do not
have this gold.
It's that they do not spend
their time, for the most part,
delivering this gold or
at least not delivering it
in a way that is truly
speaking to people
in the midst of their
personal suffering.
When you get to that
point-- I always
say you never meet
a Jew who says
I'm not going to go
to Passover seder
this year because
I know the story.
And you're not going-- you don't
meet a Jew-- a Christian who
says I'm not going to
go to Easter services
this year because
I know the story.
No.
Once you understand the
metaphysical context
for all this, you realize the
story doesn't change, but I do.
I come to see, oh, I get it.
Slavery in Egypt,
that was my divorce.
I get it.
Crucifixion, that was
my cancer diagnosis.
Oh, I get it.
Wandering through the desert,
that was my bankruptcy.
So when you do have
a way of connecting,
then the beauty
of these things is
that you realize the slavery
in Egypt and the wandering
through the promised
land-- wandering
through the desert, preceded
entering the promised land.
The crucifixion precedes
the resurrection.
In other words,
through God's promises,
this will one day be over.
This too shall pass.
And as my mind is lifted
to the genuine level
of enlightenment--
Moses, Buddha, Jesus--
you actually are lifted to
that place where you endure
the suffering of the desert.
You endure the suffering of
your personal crucifixion.
But You rise through
that alchemy,
which is the
genuine fire of God,
to that place where,
yeah, I went through that.
Things have come around.
I learned a lot.
I'm actually a better, smarter
person than I was before.
And as it says in the Bible and
in the "Course in Miracles,"
God himself has
wiped away all tears.
>>LISA: Beautifully,
beautifully said.
It brings us full
circle to what we
were talking about
earlier with the I am
and being ingrained with that.
There's another great
video clip that I
grabbed that I
want to show people
because you're so
beautifully talking
about relationships here.
And it changes what we're
talking about a little bit,
but I want you to see how
what Marianne talks about
can be brought into the context
of anything in your life.
Take a look at this.
>>WILLIAMSON: In "A
Course in Miracles,"
it talks about how religion and
psychotherapy, at their peak,
are the same thing
because it all
has to do with the
healing of the mind.
And even though, when it comes
to romantic relationships
and those kinds of attachments
with lovers and mates and all
that, we tend to get
pretty body oriented,
the truth of the
matter-- and anybody
knows this who has had much
experience with relationships.
So much goes on in the mind.
So when you heal your mind, you
heal every other relationship.
And in spiritual
terms, the idea here
is that when you are at one
with your divine center,
you will experience
oneness with other people.
If you take care of that
primary relationship,
God is your primary
relationship.
So if you take care of
the primary relationship,
then you will find
yourself in alignment
with other human relationships.
But when you are fractured
in your relationship
to the divine, you
will find that fracture
reflected in your
relationships with people.
So taking care of your
divine relationship
is taking care of yourself
because your Self,
with a capital S, is only
found in your oneness with God.
So if you do not do that,
then you're missing something.
And you tend to project
on to other people
that they can give it to you.
So if you are in
the realm of Self
with a capital S,
which can only be found
through your
relationship to God,
then you saunter out into
the world a whole person,
and you're not coming
from a wounded place
where you are
subconsciously trying
to get somebody else
to complete you,
trying to get somebody
else to fix you.
You're completed by God.
You're completed by something
which is within you.
And then you don't go out there
with this needy thing going on.
This energy of will
you come give it to me.
You go out there
with a sense of being
a complete human
being who's looking
for another complete
human being.
Somebody said to me-- a
woman at one of my seminars.
Many years ago, she said,
well, the way you're talking
about it, we wouldn't need men.
We're whole.
We're complete.
We wouldn't need men.
I said, no, but we
would desire men.
And, ultimately, a man
experiences need as control.
A man-- there's a line
that Pat Allen often says.
"A man produces into
a woman's desire."
When a woman is truly
complete in herself,
it's not a false, harsh
sense of independence.
It's a very surrendered place.
A person who knows how
to surrender to God
has surrender as one of
the notes they can play.
So a woman who is
truly independent
is not independent
in the universe.
She's independent
of other people.
But she is very
dependent on her creator.
She's very dependent.
It makes us very pliable.
It makes us very surrendered.
But we're not looking to a
man to be the source of that.
So when a woman has her
spiritual connection together,
then the way she is with
any other human being
is independent within herself.
But in the right place,
with a trustable man,
with a man who is
worthy of the job,
with a man who is strong
enough, with a man who's
committed enough, with a man
who is worthy of the assignment
as it were.
>>LISA: Well, that was
very, very wise advice.
And it applies to everything
in life, relationships, work,
business, personal
life, and everything.
And so earlier, I asked
you your I am statement.
What is an I am statement?
>>WILLIAMSON: Well,
the thing that I
think most powerfully
guides me when
I get off the spiritual
wagon is I am love.
So if I'm acting
in any other way,
I am not being who I truly am.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
Beautiful.
Thank you so much.
>>WILLIAMSON: Thank you, Lisa.
>>LISA: Oh, it's
such a pleasure.
>>WILLIAMSON: Thank you.
>>LISA: And such an honor.
Oh gosh!
I want to-- there's one more
thing I wanted to talk about.
Your incredible journey
through the political scene.
>>WILLIAMSON: Oh, yeah.
>>LISA: You left such a--
>>WILLIAMSON: I did journey
through the political scene.
>>LISA: You did.
It wouldn't be fair
for me to end this
without talking about
that because I wanted--
>>WILLIAMSON: And thank
you for your support.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
And our last interview
was about that.
And you-- what is your
opinion or prospective
about what you did?
I personally feel you
changed the direction
and left such a legacy with
what you did campaigning.
>>WILLIAMSON: Thank you.
Thank you.
>>LISA: You truly did.
Every word you spoke
made a difference.
>>WILLIAMSON: I never
felt, when I was running,
that if I won a congressional
seat, everything was OK now.
And I never felt that
if I lost, I would
stop-- would close my mouth.
So I'm not there now.
And people go to marianne.com.
I'm going to be doing a free
online progressive summit.
I personally feel strongly
and advocate very passionately
for the candidacy
of Bernie Sanders.
But what I advocate for most
passionately is be involved.
I feel that those of us
who are part of the higher
consciousness community
are the last people who
should be sitting out the great
social and political issues
of our day because if you have
a clue as to what changes one
life, you're somebody
who has a clue as to what
would change the world.
>>LISA: Oh, yes.
>>WILLIAMSON: If love is
what would change one life,
and we believe so
strongly that it will,
love is also what
would change the world.
And the world is
literally threatened.
The human race,
at this point, is
threatened by the fear-based
collective behavior
or our species.
>>LISA: And the spiritual
community, the higher
consciousness community,
felt separate from politics
until you joined the scene.
You helped bridge that gap
because it's very easy to say,
them, they.
However, our plight is
to heal the environment,
heal human consciousness.
So yet that was
disconnected before,
which you really did,
in a brilliant way,
bridge the gap for
people in this community.
So--
>>WILLIAMSON: Well if I
did in any way, shape,
or form, do what
you just said, then
it was worth every tear I cried
and every dollar that I lost,
so thank you.
And I also want to say
to you, I love your book.
I think it's great.
>>LISA: Thank you, Marianne.
>>WILLIAMSON: And I
hope everybody reads it.
>>LISA: Thank you it's
about becoming aware,
which is exactly the
journey that we're on.
>>WILLIAMSON: Absolutely.
And you're a very wise
woman, and we're all
very fortunate to have you here.
Thank you.
>>LISA: Thank you so much.
It means so much
coming from you.
Thank you.
And if you would like to watch
this replay of my interview
with Marianne, you
can go to gaia.com.
And until next time, I
invite you to stay inspired.
[THEME MUSIC]